[Music]
you must likely use it every day yet if
somebody asks you how it works you'd
have a hard time explaining it I'm not
talking about physics here it's all
about your SIM card that little chip in
your phone so let's figure it out
when was it invented first have you ever
wondered what SIM stands for it means
subscriber identity module or subscriber
identification module the first sim card
in the world was developed in 1991 by
the German company kiseki and Divya
they sold 300 SIM cards to Radio Linea a
Finnish wireless network operator in
1992 they sold the first GSM mobile
phone with a SIM card it was a Nokia
1101 today it's hard to find a person
who's never used a SIM card over 7
billion gadgets around the world use
them to make calls send SMS and surf the
web experts predict this number is going
to grow to 20 billion so the European
telecommunications standards Institute
ETSI still holds the most simple but
other private phone companies also have
some important patents thanks to which
Sims works the largest manufacturers of
SIM cards in the world is the Gemalto
company with headquarters in Amsterdam
and 15,000 employees they're now working
towards the mass production of sims for
5g networks the first SIM cards cost
more than $1 each to manufacture today
they're basically worth a few cents
apiece but that price doesn't cover
design development inserting chips into
plastic cards and shipping them why do I
need a SIM card
a SIM card has unique identification
information on it
like what mobile network it belongs to
it's called an IMSI international mobile
subscriber identity this unique ID
connects your phone number with your
gadget when someone is dialing your
number the call will go to the exact
phone you have now sim also has its own
memory even though it's small just 64
kilobytes it can store around 250
contacts and some SMS by the way the
same memory was in the Apollo guidance
computer used for the first moon
landings if your SIM card is mobile
meaning you can remove it and put it
back into your phone yourself you can
also use it on different phones this
comes in handy when your own gadgets
battery is dead and you desperately need
to make a phone call from your number in
my phone work without a SIM card well
technically a can as a camera or device
that connects you to Wi-Fi but not as a
phone to make calls or text someone for
most phones a gadget without a SIM card
is like a human without a brain the good
news is even if you seriously damage
your phone smashed your screen or bent
the casing you could still use the same
phone number and keep your contacts all
it takes is a SIM card transplantation
how does a SIM card work a SIM card
basically looks like a little piece of
plastic it has an even smaller chip
inside that is its microcontroller it's
made of silicon and plated with gold or
other metals to help it keep contact
with the phone the chip contains a
processor memory and security circuits
your mobile device reads the chip when
you stick the sim in it
it contains the operating system for the
card can do some basic math and stores
important information this information
is put on the chip on the production
line the most basic types of that
information are your international
mobile subscriber identity and a 128-bit
key called key for key identification
those are basically your login and pass
word in the mobile phone world all
messages from your phone to the network
are in a secret code the key to encrypt
and decrypt messages is also stored on
the SIM card this provides communication
privacy the SIM card chip also stores
specific data such as your cards unique
serial number the name of your cellular
carrier your PIN if you ever wondered
what it stands for by the way it's your
personal identification number to lock
and unlock the phone puk code from the
carrier to unblock the phone and much
more even your contacts and last dialed
numbers are there can someone track my
location with the help of a SIM card
this is a question of both privacy and
security while it's creepy to think
someone can track your physical location
for their purposes it's good to know
your phone can be found when it's lost
or stolen and it can also be helpful
when it concerns lost kids or elderly
people for example so a SIM card can
help to establish your location but it's
only one player in the find me game when
you insert a sim in your cell phone
tablet or even car and turn the device
on it starts connecting to cell towers
to catch the signal as you move around
your sim works with the towers nearest
to you to provide the strongest signal
all these towers have known physical
locations when phone companies or the
police use their algorithms to find out
how strong the signal is from this or
that tower they can narrow down the
search area significantly services like
Find My Phone
also use Wi-Fi data to know a more
specific location of course it'll only
work when the Wi-Fi on your gadget is on
add GPS information to this and you'll
get accurate data on any gadgets
whereabouts in real time GPS will only
be handy in this situation when you have
cellular data enabled on your plan or
gadget so if you want complete privacy
turn it off along with Wi-Fi and
tracking you down using information from
your sim alone will be a challenge do
SIM cards break
SIM cards like just about anything on
this planet can get damaged or broken
and don't last forever you'll be the
first to know when that happens as your
phone will inform you the chip is
defective you won't be able to connect
to your cellular provider in this case
water is unlikely to be the reason for
that damage though since basically all
new phones have sealed ports and Jack's
the sims themselves have always been
waterproof why our sim cards getting
smaller
the first SIM cards were around the same
shape and size of a credit card they
work fine with the first mobile phones
but as mobile technology evolved and
phones got smaller the SIM cards clearly
needed improvement to imagine fitting a
credit card into an iPhone not the best
idea right so fortunately Sims became
smaller and more powerful at the same
time first came the standard thumbnail
size since they were standard until 2010
when the Micro SIM became universal but
even that sim had too much useless
plastic some people who upgraded their
phones cut out the most important part
with basic tools like scissors it was
risky since damaging the chip even a bit
could ruin it all
in 2012 nano Sims came into play which
are just little chips with no extra
plastic around them if you ever need to
insert a newer generation sim in an
older phone there are special adapters
for that the future of SIM cards the
latest iPhone models give you an idea of
what all SIM cards will be like in the
future they'll be e sims which means
embedded SIM cards their size will be
just a fraction of a nano sim forget the
huge pieces of plastic and scissors used
to cut out the chips in fact there will
be no physical SIM cards whatsoever
instead they'll be tiny chips on your
phones logic board the information on
the chip will be rewritable so you'll be
able to change your carrier with a few
easy steps a sims will be cloud-based
super secure super fast and convenient
to use
we'll also be a win-win situation for
the manufacturers less distribution and
installation costs and better design
with more free physical space on your
gadget losing one slot on your phone is
also great because it will ensure extra
protection from water and dust getting
inside so the new iPhones already have
two SIM cards one of the old-school
physical type and the other and assume
that you can use with any carrier you
like so what age did you get your first
cell phone let me know down in the
comments if you learn something new
today then give this video a like and
share it with a friend
but hey don't go swapping out your SIM
card just yet we have over 2000 cool
videos for you to check out all you have
to do is pick the left or right video
click on it and enjoy stay on the bright
side of life